[Search] Dev docs (#90979)
elastic/kibana: dev_docs/tutorials/data/search.mdx

---

> id: kibDevTutorialDataSearchAndSessions

Reviewer: Can I view/preview this page somewhere?

Author: Not yet, this requires an additional PR in another repo

slug: /kibana-dev-docs/tutorials/data/search-and-sessions
title: Kibana data.search Services
summary: Kibana Search Services 
date: 2021-02-10
tags: ['kibana', 'onboarding', 'dev', 'tutorials', 'search', 'sessions', 'search-sessions']
---

## Search Service

### Low Level Search 

Searching data stored in `Elasticsearch` can be done in various ways, for example using the `Elasticsearch` REST API or using an `Elasticsearch Client` for low level access.

However, the recommended and easist way to search `Elasticsearch` is by using the low level search service. The service is exposed from the `data` plugin, and by using it, you don't only gain access to the data you stored, but also to additional capabilities, such as Custom Search Strategies, Asynchronous Search, Partial Results, Search Sessions and more.

Here is a basic example for using the `data.search` service from a custom plugin:

```ts
import { CoreStart, Plugin } from 'kibana/public';

> import { DataPublicPluginStart, isCompleteResponse, isErrorResponse } from '???';

Reviewer: ```suggestion
import { DataPublicPluginStart, isCompleteResponse, isErrorResponse } from '../../src/plugins/data';
```

I understand that number of `../../` would be different for consumers, but I think it is better than `???`

export interface MyPluginStartDependencies {
  data: DataPublicPluginStart;
}

export class MyPlugin implements Plugin {
  public start(core: CoreStart, { data }: MyPluginStartDependencies) {
    const query = {
      filter: [{
        match_all: {}
      }],
    };
    const req = {
      params: {
        index: 'my-index-*',
        body: {
          query,
          aggs: {},
        },
      }
    };
    data.search.search(req).subscribe({
      next: (result) => {
        if (isCompleteResponse(res)) {
          // handle search result
        } else if (isErrorResponse(res)) {
          // handle error, this means that some results were returned, but the search has failed to complete.
        } else {

>           // handle partial results. See LINK TO PARTIAL RESULTS for more information.

Reviewer: If this is not ready, let's remove it? 

```suggestion
          // handle partial results if you want
```

        }
      }, 
      error: (e) => {
        // handle error thrown, for example a server hangup
      },
    })
  }
}
```

> Note: The `data` plugin contains services to help you generate the `query` and `aggs` portions, as well as managing indicies using the `data.indexPatterns` service. You can read more about them [here]().  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Note: The `data` plugin contains services to help you generate the `query` and `aggs` portions, as well as managing indices using the `data.indexPatterns` service. You can read more about them [here](if not ready let's remove this link?).  
```

> <DocCallOut title="Server Side Search">

Reviewer: Not sure where I can preview this :(

  The `data.search` service is available on both server and client, with similar APIs.
</DocCallOut>

#### Error handling

> The `search` method can throw several types of errors. 

Reviewer: Not sure what we mean by  `several types`. Can we list the types or link to them? 
if no, then I'd omit the "several types" part

If you want to display them to a user, within the context of an application, you may use the helper method provided on the `data.search` service. Those errors will be shown in a toast message, using the `core.notifications` service.  

```ts
data.search.search(req).subscribe({
  next: (result) => {}, 
  error: (e) => {
    data.search.showError(e);
  },
})
```

If you choose to handle errors by yourself, look out for errors coming from `Elasticsearch`. They have an additional `attributes` property that holds the raw error from `Elasticsearch`.

```ts
data.search.search(req).subscribe({
  next: (result) => {}, 
  error: (e) => {
    if (e instanceof IEsError) {
      showErrorReason(e.attributes);
    }
  },
})
```

#### Aborting a running search 

The search service `search` method supports a second argument called `options`. One of those options is providing an `abortSignal`, to stop searches from running to completion, if the result is no longer needed.

```ts
const abortController = new AbortController();
data.search.search(req, {
  abortSignal: abortController.signal,
}).subscribe({
  next: (result) => {
    // handle result
  }, 
  error: (e) => {

>     if (e instanceof AbortError) {

Reviewer: Maybe show that `AbortError` is imported from the data plugin

export const myEnhancedSearchStrategyProvider = (
  data: PluginStart
): ISearchStrategy<IMyStrategyRequest, IMyStrategyResponse> => {
  // Get the default search strategy
  const ese = data.search.getSearchStrategy(ENHANCED_ES_SEARCH_STRATEGY);
  return {
    search: (request, options, deps) => {
      // search will be called multiple times, 
      // be sure your response formatting is capable of handling partial results, as well as the final result.
      return formatResponse(ese.search(request, options, deps));
    },
    cancel: async (id, options, deps) => {
      // call the cancel method of the async strategy you are using or implement your own cancellation function.
      await ese.cancel(id, options, deps);
    },
    extend: async (id, keepAlive, options, deps) => {
      // async search results are not stored indefinitely. By default, they expire after 7 days (or as defined by xpack.data_enhanced.search.sessions.defaultExpiration setting in kibana.yml).
      // call the extend method of the async strategy you are using or implement your own extend function.
      await ese.extend(id, options, deps);
    },
  };
};
```

### High Level Search

> 

Reviewer: Would be nice to have a paragraph here with a short description. Why/when would you use a high level search

While you may ignore them and wait for the final result before rendering, you may also use those partial results to create a more interactive experience for your users. It is highly advised however, to make sure users are aware that the results they are seeing are partial.

```ts
// Handling partial results
data.search.search(req).subscribe({
  next: (result) => {
    if (isCompleteResponse(res)) {
      renderFinalResult(res);
    } else if (isPartialResponse(res)) {
      renderPartialResult(res);
    }
  },
})

// Skipping partial results
const finalResult = await data.search.search(req).toPromise();
```

### Search Sessions

A `Search Session` is a higher level concept, than search. It is used to describe a grouping of one or more async search requests with additional context. 

`Search Sessions` come in handy when you want to enable a user to run something asynchronously (for example, a dashboard over a very long period of time), and then restore the results quickly at a later time, as the `Search Service` transparently fetches results from the `.async-search` index, instead of running each request again.

> Internally, any search run within the a `Search Session` is saved into a `Saved Object`, allowing `Kibana` to manage their lifecycle. Most `Saved Objects` are deleted automatically after a short period of time, but if a user chooses to save the `Search Session`, the `Saved Object` is persisted, so that results can be restored in a later time.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Internally, any search run within a search session is saved into an object, allowing Kibana to manage their lifecycle. Most saved objects are deleted automatically after a short period of time, but if a user chooses to save the search session, the saved object is persisted, so that results can be restored in a later time.
```

> Stored `Search Sessions` are listed in the management application, under `Kibana > Search Sessions`, making it easy to find, manage and restore them.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Stored search sessions are listed in the *Management* application, under *Kibana > Search Sessions*, making it easy to find, manage, and restore them.
```

> As a developer, there might be two different, but common, use cases you might encounter:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
As a developer, you might encounter these two common, use cases:
```

>  * Running a search inside an existing Search Session

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
 * Running a search inside an existing search session
```

>  * Supporting Search Sessions in your application

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
 * Supporting search sessions in your application
```

> #### Running a search inside an existing Search Session

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
#### Running a search inside an existing search session
```

> For the sake of this example, lets assume you are implementing a new type of `Embeddable` that will be shown on dashboards. The same principle applies however, to any `search` requests you may be running, as long as the application you are running inside is managing an active session.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For this example, assume you are implementing a new type of `Embeddable` that will be shown on dashboards. The same principle applies, however, to any search requests that you are running, as long as the application you are running inside is managing an active session.
```

> Since the Dashboard application is already managing a `Search Session`, all you need to do is pass down the `searchSessionId` argument to any `search` call (this applies to both the low and high level search APIs). 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Because the Dashboard application is already managing a search session, all you need to do is pass down the `searchSessionId` argument to any `search` call. This applies to both the low and high level search APIs. 
```

> Once you do so, the `search` information will be added to the `Search Session` `Saved Object`. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The search information will be added to the saved object for the search session. 
```

```ts
export class SearchEmbeddable
  extends Embeddable<MyInput, MyOutput> {

  private async fetchData() {
    // Every embeddable receives an optional `searchSessionId` input parameter. 
    const { searchSessionId } = this.input;

    // Setup your search source
    this.configureSearchSource();

    try {
      // Mark the embeddable as loading
      this.updateOutput({ loading: true, error: undefined });

      // Make the request, wait for the final result
      const resp = await searchSource.fetch$({
        sessionId: searchSessionId,
      }).toPromise();

      this.useSearchResult(resp);

      this.updateOutput({ loading: false, error: undefined });
    } catch (error) {
      // handle search errors
      this.updateOutput({ loading: false, error });
    }
  }
}

``` 

> You may also retrieve the active `Search Session ID` from the `Search Service` directly:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can also retrieve the active `Search Session ID` from the `Search Service` directly:
```

```ts
async function fetchData(data: DataPublicPluginStart) {
  try {
    return await searchSource.fetch$({
        sessionId: data.search.sessions.getSessionId(),
      }).toPromise();
  } catch (e) {
    // handle search errors
  }
}

```

> <DocCallOut title="Search Sessions with Server Side Search">

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
<DocCallOut title="Search sessions with server side search">
```

>   Search Sessions are initiated by the client. If you are using a route that runs server side searches, you can send the `searchSessionId` to the server, and then have it passed down to the server side `data.search` function call.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  Search sessions are initiated by the client. If you are using a route that runs server side searches, you can send the `searchSessionId` to the server, and then pass it down to the server side `data.search` function call.
```

</DocCallOut>

> #### Supporting Search Sessions in your application

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
#### Supporting search sessions in your application
```

> If you want to implement the ability to create and restore `Search Sessions` within your application, you should ask yourself the following questions first:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Before implementing the ability to create and restore search sessions in your application, ask yourself the following questions:
```

Once you answer those questions, proceed to implement the following bits of code in your application: 

##### Provide storage configuration

First of all, in your plugin's `start` lifecycle method, call the `enableStorage` method. This method helps the `Session Service` gather all information it requires to `save` the `Search Sessions` upon a user's request, as well as constructing the `restore` state:

```ts
export class MyPlugin implements Plugin {
  public start(core: CoreStart, { data }: MyPluginStartDependencies) {
    const sessionRestorationDataProvider: SearchSessionInfoProvider = {
      data,
      getDashboard
    }

    data.search.session.enableStorage({
      getName: async () => {
        // return the name you want to give the saved Search Session
        return `MyApp_${Math.random()}`;
      },
      getUrlGeneratorData: async () => {

>         // Read more about the URL generators **link**

Reviewer: missing link

        return {
          urlGeneratorId: MY_URL_GENERATOR,
          initialState: getUrlGeneratorState({ ...deps, shouldRestoreSearchSession: false }),
          restoreState: getUrlGeneratorState({ ...deps, shouldRestoreSearchSession: true }),
        };
      },
    });
  }
}
```

<DocCallOut title="Search Sessions Restore State">

>   The restore state of a Search Session may be different from the initial state used to create it. For example, where the initial state may contain relative dates, in the restore state those must be converted to absolute ones (Read more about the [NowProvider here]()).  

Reviewer: missing link: 
> (Read more about the [NowProvider here]())

</DocCallOut>

<DocCallOut color="danger" title="Search Sessions Indicator">

>   Calling `enableStorage` will also enable the `Search Session Indicator` component in the chrome component of your solution. The `Search Session Indicator` is a small button, used by default to engage users and save new Search Sessions. If you wish to implement your own UI, contact us to decouple this behavior.  

Author: Kibana Application Services team

</DocCallOut>

##### Start a new Search Session 

Make sure to call `start` when the *state* you previously defined changes. 

```ts

function onSearchSessionConfigChange() {
  this.searchSessionId = data.search.sessions.start();
}

```

Pass the `searchSessionId` to every `search` call inside your application. If you're using `Embeddables` make sure to pass down the `searchSessionId` as `input`. 

If for any reason, you can't pass the `searchSessionId` directly, you can also retrieve it from the service.

```ts
const currentSearchSessionId = data.search.sessions.getSessionId();

```

> ##### Clear Search Sessions 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
##### Clear search sessions 
```

> Creating a new `Search Session` clears the previous one. However, be sure to explicitly `clear` the `Search Session` when your application is being destroyed:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Creating a new search session clears the previous one. You must explicitly `clear` the search session when your application is being destroyed:
```

```ts
function onDestroy() {
  data.search.session.clear();
}

```

> If you don't call `clear`, you will see a warning in the console while developing. However, when running in production, you will get a fatal error. This is done to avoid leakage of unrelated `search` requests into an existing `Search Session`, left open by mistake.

Reviewer: `you will get a fatal error`

I don't think so. 
if this leaks to prod (which it shouldn't) then as already mentioned whoever is calling `start()` will remove the older session. 
There also could be subtle bugs.

But we don't fail with a fatal error in production mode afaik.

> If you don't call `clear`, you will see a warning in the console while developing. However, when running in production, you will get a fatal error. This is done to avoid leakage of unrelated `search` requests into an existing `Search Session`, left open by mistake.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If you don't call `clear`, you will see a warning in the console while developing. However, when running in production, you will get a fatal error. This is done to avoid leakage of unrelated search requests into an existing search session left open by mistake.
```

> ##### Restore Search Sessions 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
##### Restore search sessions 
```

> The last step of the integration is restoring an existing `Search Session`. At the moment, the `searchSessionId` parameter, as well as the rest of the restore state, are passed into the application via the URL (non-url support is planned for future releases).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The last step of the integration is restoring an existing  search session. The `searchSessionId` parameter and the rest of the restore state are passed into the application via the URL. Non-URL support is planned for future releases.
```

If you detect the presense of a `searchSessionId` parameter in the URL, call the `restore` method **instead** of calling `start`. The previous example would now become:

```ts

function onSearchSessionConfigChange(searchSessionIdFromUrl?: string) {
  if (searchSessionIdFromUrl) {
    data.search.sessions.restore(searchSessionIdFromUrl);
  } else {
    data.search.sessions.start();
  }
}

```

> Once you `restore` the session, as long as all `search` requests run with the same `searchSessionId`, the `Search Session` should be seamlessly restored.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Once you `restore` the session, as long as all `search` requests run with the same `searchSessionId`, the search session should be seamlessly restored.
```

> ##### Customize the User Experience

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
##### Customize the user experience
```

---
id: kibDevTutorialDataSearchAndSessions
slug: /kibana-dev-docs/tutorials/data/search-and-sessions
title: Kibana data.search Services
summary: Kibana Search Services 
date: 2021-02-10
tags: ['kibana', 'onboarding', 'dev', 'tutorials', 'search', 'sessions', 'search-sessions']
---

> ## Search service

Reviewer 3: if you leave this out, and use 2 hashs for the below headings, you'll get more navigation levels on the right nav.

<img width="1196" alt="Screen Shot 2021-02-25 at 9 05 11 AM" src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/16563603/109165843-07f95c80-774a-11eb-8615-e28327e6d3c2.png">

See you don't see the section for "error handling" and there is only one top level entry, so it seems a bit wasteful of that space.

### Low level search 

Searching data stored in Elasticsearch can be done in various ways, for example using the Elasticsearch REST API or using an `Elasticsearch Client` for low level access.

> However, the recommended and easist way to search Elasticsearch is by using the low level search service. The service is exposed from the `data` plugin, and by using it, you not only gain access to the data you stored, but also to capabilities, such as Custom Search Strategies, Asynchronous Search, Partial Results, Search Sessions, and more.

Reviewer 3: I am actually recommending the opposite here: https://github.com/elastic/kibana/pull/92743/files#diff-21850b7db15ddf8a1b1ca9dd3a3351160f41bfcb29453b386611b5aaded15d10R95

I think we should be promoting the higher-level search source as the first search utility to consider using because it will start plugin developers off on the right path of using our higher-level constructs like Index Patterns.
